This is a recursive sort,
this one's pretty difficult.
I would say this is gonna be the first
very challenging thing that I'm gonna have
to do during the body of this course.
So if this feels hard, it is hard, so
I just want to give you permission before
hand to be okay that
this is gonna be hard.
All right, so
let's apply a recursion to sorting a list.
Kinda like insertion sort, where you
assume that a list of 1 is already sorted.
We're going to take that and
we're going to apply that to sorting.
So the idea here is that we
have a list of length 10.
And we're going to take that and
break that into two lists of length 5.
And then break that again into things of
two and three, and then eventually you're
going to break everything down into
lists lists of length one, right,
using recursion.
Once you arrive to a list of length one,
that list is sorted.
That's the base case, right?
So you return that list of length one, and
then you're going to stitch
together in a sorted fashion.
The two lists that are coming back, right?
So if I get a list of length one and
a list of length one,
those are two sorted lists and
then I can write a merging
function that's gonna take two sorted
lists and stitch them together.
So let's see if I can kind of
show you this a little bit.
So let's say I called merge sort on
this function here of 1,5, 7 ,4, 2, 3,6.
Okay, I'm then going to call merge
sort on 1,5,4,1,5,7,4 and 2,3,6.
Okay, then I'm going to do
this part first, right,
because that's how the recursion
is going to go, right?
It's going to go down one side and
it's going to kind of go through the
various different parts of the the tree.
Okay, so I'm gonna take this
list merge 1,5,7,4, that's gonna
be broken down into merge sort of 1, 5,
which also be broken down into this, but
we'll do the first one first, then that's
gonna be broken down into merge 1.
We're sort of 1 and merge sort of 5, so
you can see here we're three
levels deep in our recursion.
Okay, so so far all we've been doing,
we haven't been doing anything other than
just breaking big arrays
down into smaller arrays.
Okay, so we hit here one is of length one,
this is the base case, right?
So this level of recursion is
just going to return back up so
returns the sorted list of one.
Okay, then it's going to call this
one over here, merge sort of five.
So, this is of length one, this is
the base case, and it's going to return.
So now we have merge sort on
both of these from depth 3,
they're gonna be returning
back up to depth 2.
So now we're gonna call
this merge function.
Notice that merge sort and
merge are slightly different.
Merge sort, this is a recursive function,
merge is not a recursive function.
Merge is just a function then you're gonna
write that you pass in two sorted lists.
Now I'm extra emphasis on sorted,
right, it has to be already sorted or
all of our assumptions about
this are gonna break down.
So what merge does is it just, again
merges together two sorted lists will
basically just iterate through both of
those lists and say, all right is 1 or
5 smaller?
Want a smaller,
add it to the sorted lists, right?
So, once the one of the arrays is empty,
then you can just add
everything on the right array.
So, in this case it's just 5, right,
so, then we return back here.
1, 5 that's a new sorted list, right,
that's what that merge algorithm does.
It just takes two sorted lists
makes one sorted list returns that.
Okay, so
now we have the sorted list of 1, 5.
Notice that that's actually
originally what it was.
But it doesn't know that until it's
actually run the whole gambit of
merge sort.
Okay, so now it's going to pop back up
to here because this part returned,
right merge 1, 5,
due to how recursion works, right?
This is now finished, it's, returned back
and it returned this 1,5, all right.
So now we're popping back
up here to depth 2 and
we're going to run merge sort on 7, 4.
Okay, so that's going to get broken down
again to merge seven and merge four.
Sorry, merge sort 7 and merge sort 4,
these are gonna be base case,
base case there, and then those
are gonna get returned back, and
that's gonna merge, it's gonna get called
on this list and this list, right?
So you're gonna ask the question,
is 4 or 7 smaller, 4 smaller so
you get this in the new array.
Right arrays now empty,
right, this one's now empty.
So we can just blindly concatenate
everything that's left in the left array.
That's just one item, right,
so now we have 4, 7, okay.
Now we return that back,
that gets returned
back up to here, right, this level.
So now we're gonna call merge
on these two lists, right, the,
1,5 which we got from up here.
And the 4, 7 that we got here,
again, very critical,
these are both sorted and
we know that, is 1 or 4 smaller?
1, you add 1, is 5 or 4 smaller,
because we're just going
down the list here, right?
So we go to here and
we're comparing 5 to 4,
you say 4 is smaller,
so we have 1, 4 here.
Then you ask is 5 or 7 smaller,
5 is to get 1,4,5 and
then left to raise now empty, which is,
cause all that's left is 7, right?
And then you just add that to the race, so
now we have a larger list of 1, 4, 5,7.
Okay, and it's just this, right,
all you're doing is breaking
everything down to small problems and
building them back up and
you're building them back
together by using merge, right?
I also see people call merge stitch,
right,
because you're stitching
together two sorted arrays.
So 2,3 ,6 that's gonna get
broken down to 2 and 3 and 6,
2 and 3, 2 is base case 3 is base case.
Then we're going to call merge 2 and 3,
then out of that we get
returns sorted array.
This should be 2,3, not 2,4,
but yeah, 2,3 right there.
Merge sort of 6, that's a base case,
we return that, so
now we're gonna merge together 2,
3, and 6, right?
And by the end of that we get this
return sorted array 2, 3, and 6, right?
So now we're back up to the point
of here at the beginning,
we have merge this and merge this, right.
So that's what this is, and
this is where we get our really big stitch
together is 1 or 2 smaller 1 for
2 smaller 2 is 3, or 4 smaller 3.
And you can see together this gets
stitched all the way until it is that
the right away gets empty and we
concatenate everything in the left array,
and we end up with 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
So that was a long journey,
thank you for sticking with me.
That is the entire algorithm, right, you
have two functions you have merge sort and
merge, the only thing that merge does
is it takes two sorted lists and
makes one sorted list.
That's all merge does, it's totally blind
to the rest of the world, doesn't care,
not recursive.
It's just one simple function
that takes two sorted lists and
makes one sorted list.
And then you got merge sort that all it
does is it breaks big arrays down into
smaller arrays and then it concatenates
the things that come back from its merge
sort recursive calls and
passes those into merge.
So here's kind of a visual
representation of it.
And you might be asking,
do I put does the left array have to
be bigger than the right array, right?
This one is a length 4, this is like 3,
it doesn't matter, right?
You can even be inconsistent,
it doesn't matter.
Okay, so this breaks this down into
eventually lists of length 1, and
then it stitches them back together.
Until eventually you end up
back here with a sorted list.